---
slug: po
title: PigLang Initialized
authors: [abiin-kun]
tags: [notatutorial, blogging, learning in public]
---

# PigLang

## Project Overview
Pig is a Simple Quick Programming Language for Beginners and Advanced Users.

## Project Goals
The Main Target is to create an Programming Language that anyone can use even those who dont know Coding, Here are some Goals To Fulfill:

1. Showcase the developer's skills in Logical and Analytical Thinking and Programming.
2. Create a captivating Programming Language that WORKS.
3. Implement Variables, Datatypes and Functions.
4. Implement Control Flow :- If,Else,Then and For.

## Project Scope
The project scope encompasses the following key elements:

### Scanner
Scanner will Do the Lexical Analysis and Translates source code to to Tokens,

### Parser
Parser will Make the AST or Abstract Syntax Tree for defining the GRAMMAR Of the Language.

### CodeGen
Codegen Function to Translate ASTs to LLVM IR, So LLVM Can Compile it.

### Compiler
LLVM will take the IR and Translate it to Machine Code.

## Project Requirements
To achieve the desired project goals and scope, the following requirements have been identified:

1. Language Keywords and Grammer
2. An Programming Language to Implement the Compiler, I chose Rust
3. Deep Knowledge about how Programming Languages work
4. Good in Programming And Logical THinking
## Initial Planning and Development Setup
During the project initiation phase, the following activities were undertaken:

1. Research: I Will Read and dive deep into other Programming Languages Source Codes for Ideas and help.

2. Project Plan: A detailed project plan was created, outlining the various stages of development, key milestones, and estimated timelines. This plan provides a roadmap for the project's execution and ensures effective project management.


3. Development Environment Setup:
   - Installed Emacs
   - Installed Rust
   - Initialized Git Repo
